In this video we're talking about divisibility and some of the tricks that we use to say whether or
not a number is divisible by two three four five six seven eight nine or ten.
There are a lot more divisibility rules than we're going to cover here.
But these are the ones that you're going to use most commonly because we're going to be looking to see
whether or not a number is divisible by some of these lower numbers here.
So we're going to talk about the divisibility rules first for two.
This one's going to be the most obvious out of all of the divisibility rules.
It's just if the number is an even number then it's going to be divisible by two.
The way that you know for sure if it's even is if the last digit is 0 2 4 6 or 8.
So if the last digit is even then the number is divisible by 2.
So because all of these numbers here 21 26 and 128 have an even last digit 0 is an even number.
Six is an even number.
Eight is an even number and is included in the set.
0 2 4 6 or 8.
We know that all three of these numbers are divisible by two.
So we can go ahead and say that these are all divisible by two.
Now what about divisibility by three.
Well in that case the trick that we're going to use is we're going to add up all of the digits in our
number and see if the sum is divisible by three.
So in this first number here 120 we're going to add up the digits the digits are 1 2 and 0.
So we're going to add those together one plus two plus zero is three and three is divisible by three.
So 120 is divisible by three.
If we add up the digits in 126 one plus two is three three plus six is nine.
Nine is divisible by three.
So 126 is also divisible by three.
If we look at 128 we get one plus two is three three Plus Eight is 11 11 is not evenly divisible by
three we get three and two thirds three doesn't go evenly into 11.
So that means that 128 is not divisible by three.
What about the divisibility rule for 4.
What we're going to do is look at the last two digits of the number and see if that number is divisible
by 4.
So in this example here we have the number 120.
We're just going to look at the last two digits.
In that case the last two digits is the number 20 since 20 is divisible by 4 forgoes and a twenty five
times.
That means that 120 is also divisible by fours.
That one's going to be divisible by four.
If we look at 126 we're only looking at the last two digits so we look at 26 is 26 evenly divisible
by four.
No.
4 doesn't go evenly into 26.
So 126 is not going to be divisible by 4.
If we look at 128 we only look at the last two digits 28 and forgoes evenly into 28 it goes in seven
times.
So 128 will be divisible by four.
Five is an easy one and should make sense to us.
We're just looking for numbers that end in zero or in five.
So one hundred twenty is divisible by five because the last digit is a zero but 126 and 128 are not
divisible by five because the last digit is not a 5 or 0 6 and 8 are not 5 or 0.
So these two numbers are not divisible by 5.
Since the divisibility rules for two and three are pretty quick.
We like to use those as test to figure out whether or not the number is divisible by 6.
If the number is divisible by 2 and 3 then it's also divisible by 6 since 120 is divisible by 2 and
3.
We know it's also divisible by 6.
And since 126 is a visible Bible 2 and 3 we know it's also divisible by 6.
However since 128 is divisible by 2 but not by 3 it's not going to be divisible by 6.
The rule for seven is a little bit harder to remember but here's what it is.
We take the last digit in the numbers so for 120 we take 0 we multiply it by 5.
So zero times 5 is zero.
And then we add that result to the rest of the numbers.
So here the rest of the number is 12.
So we take 12 plus 0 and we get 12 is 12 that result divisible by seven.
No it's not.
Which means 120 is not going to be divisible by 7.
Let's take an example that does work here.
Let's look at 126.
Again we take the last digit the last digit 6 we multiply that by 5.
So six times five gives us 30 and then we add 30 to the rest of the number.
So we take 12 plus 30 we get 42 and we say is 42 divisible by 7.
And in fact it is seven goes into 42 six times.
Exactly.
So 126 is going to be divisible by seven.
If we look at 128 we'll see that it won't work we'll take five times the last digit.
So five times eight is 40 40 plus the rest of the number here 12 gives us 52 is 52 divisible by seven.
No it's not so 128 is not going to be divisible by 7.
The trick we use for divisibility by eight isn't really a trick at all.
We're just looking to see if the last three digits of the number are divisible by eight.
Not individually but together as a whole number.
So because we're dealing with three digit numbers here we're looking at the whole number the last three
digits so we say is one hundred twenty divisible by eight.
In this case it's not really a trick.
But if you had a number that was much larger in the thousands or the millions you could just take the
last three digits of the number and say is 120 divisible by 8 so instead of dividing through the whole
number just look at the last three digits.
In this case 120 is divisible by 8.
It goes in 15 times.
So we're going to say yes 120 is divisible by eight which means it's also going to go evenly into 128
but it's not going to go into 126 because 126 divided by 8 does not give you a whole number.
But 128 divided by 8 does give you a whole number.
The rule for nine is very similar to the rule for three.
You just sum up the individual digits and if the sum is divisible by nine then the whole number is divisible
by nine.
So we add up the digits in 120 we say one plus two plus 0 gives us 3 3 is not divisible by 9.
So 120 will not be divisible by 9 if we add up the digits in 126 we get one plus two is three three
plus six is nine.
Nine is divisible by nine it goes in one time obviously.
So 126 will also be divisible by nine.
Here if we take 128 we say one plus two is three three Plus Eight is 11 nine doesn't go into 11 evenly.
So one twenty eight will not be divisible by nine and then 10 is really similar to the rule for five
and it should be an easy one.
It's just if the number ends in zero then the number will be divisible by 10.
So 120 because it's last digit is a zero will be divisible by 10.
But 126 ends in 6 zero and 128 ends in eight not 0.
So those numbers will not be divisible by 10.
So these are just some of the divisibility rules.
There are many more but hopefully these ones will be quicker when you're trying to figure out whether
a large number like these three are divisible by some of these smaller numbers like 2 through 10.